Hey there, welcome to the Posit Data Science Hangout. I'm Libby Heron, and this is a recording
of our weekly community call that happens every Thursday at 12pm US Eastern Time. If
you are not joining us live, you miss out on the amazing chat that's going on. So find
the link in the description where you can add our call to your calendar and come hang
out with the most supportive, friendly, and funny data community you'll ever experience.
Can't wait to see you there. Now I would love to go ahead and introduce our featured
leader today, Kiegan Rice, Senior Statistician at NORC at the University of Chicago. Kiegan,
thank you so much for joining us. I would love it if you could introduce yourself. Tell
us a little bit about you and something you like to do for fun.
Yeah, hi. Thanks for having me. It's really good to see everybody. I see some familiar
faces both on and off camera. So I'm Kiegan Rice. I'm a Senior Statistician at NORC. And
if you don't know what NORC is, it is a nonprofit, nonpartisan research institute. And we do
a lot of social science type research, a lot of public policy type research, and do a lot
of work with federal, state, and local governments and foundations and things like that. So I,
in my role as a Senior Statistician, actually, weirdly enough, mostly do data visualization
and science communication work. I don't do a lot of stat modeling anymore. So I like
to joke that I am a statistician. I don't, you know, get the chance to do a lot of deep
modeling anymore. But I lead the development of interactive data explorers and interactive
applications of all sorts for various clients with different purposes. And I also research
data visualization design when I have time. I spend a lot of time talking to both technical
and non-technical groups of people and bridging that gap a little bit. And I work with a lot
of really wonderful, brilliant, and kind colleagues who research all sorts of things, education,
healthcare, public health, economics, public safety. And I feel like I'm probably forgetting
one or three, but a lot of different things. I get to kind of play in everybody's backyard
a bit. So yeah, I, that's a little bit about me.
What about something that you like to do outside of work for fun?
I am a big reader. So, and also a board gamer, though I haven't been able to board game much
recently. But I read a lot of sci-fi and fantasy, though I definitely had a lull for a few years
there. So I'm just kind of getting back into it. So if anyone has recommendations, let me know.
My goodness. Well, this is a dangerous topic. Megan Harris and I are both very excited right now.
Yes, we're all getting board games comments in the chat.
We're all going to have to like get together after this on LinkedIn and talk about fantasy books and
board games. We will spare everybody, but get in the chat and tell me what your favorite board
game is. I'm a huge board gamer and video gamer as well. All right. Oh, it's going to be so
distracting watching all those amazing book titles roll in. I have a feeling that someone is going to
ask you for a book recommendation later. So be thinking on that. But I wanted to just before we
get started, say that one of the reasons that Keegan is here is because I was such a fan
of Keegan's Posit Conference talk last year. So I'm going to stick it in the chat for everybody.
It was a talk called Wait, That's Shiny. And I remember just seeing the title and thinking,
oh, this is going to be about shiny apps that don't look like shiny apps, doesn't it? And it
absolutely was. Keegan definitely delivered. So I'll pop that in the chat for everybody.
If I can post, there we go. Definitely go watch that. But I wanted to sort of kick off by asking
you just some details around your introduction to shiny. So like, did you learn shiny in undergrad
at grad school? Did you think that this is what you would be doing when you were learning statistics?
That's a good question. No, I didn't really think this is what I would be doing.
So I first started learning it when I was in grad school. So a little bit of background.
I have a PhD in statistics. And again, this is why I joke that I'm a statistician, because people
sometimes forget that, actually, that I went to grad school for five years and did statistics,
because I mostly just visualize things now. But I started playing around with shiny in grad school
and looking at some historical data and some maps. And I made this really, really terrible,
looking back on it now, shiny app that I called user-friendly at the time. And that was like my
master's thesis. And it's really funny to think back on how not user-friendly at all that
user-friendly Data Explorer was. But I played around with it a little bit. And then I just
kind of didn't think about shiny for about three years, really. I mostly worked non-interactively
and did a lot of data analysis and managed a big research project in the rest of my PhD.
And then when I joined NORC, I had focused a lot on reproducibility in graduate school. And they
were like, oh, so you can code. You should help us on this shiny project we're working on.
And I totally picked it back up right away. And then the rest is sort of history, as they say.
I got stuck in this, like, I just want to develop shiny all the time hole. And now it's been almost
five years. And that's pretty much what I do all day. Well, we say stuck. We mean, like, privileged
to be in this. Yeah, yeah, yeah. It's a good hole to be stuck in. It sure is. We love shiny here.
Well, I wanted to give a little bit of context for everybody as well. Some things that I know
will be great to ask Keegan about and that I would love to talk with Keegan about.
One of the things is, how do you gain authority, gain leadership, maybe without people leadership
authority? How do you navigate the technical leadership path where you want to stay engaged
in project work? You want to stay engaged in individual contributor work.
But you want to move up. You don't necessarily want to be a people manager. This has been on
my radar a lot. A lot of people have been asking about it. That would be a great thing to talk
about with Keegan. And then also a lot about design. Keegan knows a ton about visualization
design, app design. I feel like there's just a wealth of information to talk about there.
And then also what it's like being a bridge between highly, highly technical people and
less technical stakeholders or design folks and tips and tricks in that area would be
fantastic to ask about. All right, let's go ahead and hop over to Slido where, oh my gosh,
I already see fantastic questions coming in. Let me go through some of these.
Noor, you have a great question. Would you like to unmute and ask that one?
Oh, God. Hi. Hi. Can everyone hear me? Yes. Excellent. Cool. I was not expecting to be
picked already. Hi, Keegan, right? Yes, hi. Nice to meet you. I also emphasize the whole
coming from statistics and people forgetting. I did actually, my background is math and stats.
I do know what you're talking about. But my question is on the data vis side. What are
your top tips for data visualization design that you've accrued over the year through your work
and so forth? That is a great question. So, I could probably talk about this forever. So,
I will try to keep it relatively brief. But I would say one of the biggest tips that I have
is really think about who your audience is. So, we as data people tend to get really stuck
in our own use of visualizations when we're analyzing data, when we're thinking about
what data vis can be used for. We use it a lot in exploratory data analysis, or at least I do.
And I think it's really easy to think that, oh, well, I understand this chart. So, other people
will also understand this chart. Whereas actually, most of the time, if we're working with data
people, we have much more familiarity and expertise and ability to read charts right
off the bat and understand them than most people do. And so, I think one of my biggest
tips that we've actually found in research that we've done, but also we just apply practically
all the time, is that you really have to think about who you're visualizing data for.
And if that's not a very statsy or data-heavy audience, you might have to actually kind of
pull back on how complex of a visual you're using or really think carefully about your labels
and how you're kind of describing the chart and how you're laying it out.
Putting too much data in one visual can actually just be really overwhelming for some people,
and they might not even engage with the chart if they look at it and think,
I'm really going to have to spend some time to figure out what this is saying.
So, that's one of my biggest things, is just really trying to put yourself in the shoes of
others. And a great trick for this is asking someone who does not visualize data regularly
to take a look at your chart and ask if they understand it. I do this all the time with my
friends. I will send them something and be like, does this make sense? And a lot of times they say,
no, what are you talking about? And then I fix it. So, that's a really handy approach too,
is just to lean on people who maybe aren't as in the data space when you're thinking about
visualizing. I love that. I do this to my husband all the time. He's like, you're making me feel
dumb. I'm like, no, no, no. If you feel dumb, the visualization is wrong, and it is my fault.
You are not dumb. Hold on. I'm going to go fix it. And usually that means taking everything away,
like getting rid of all of the things that he was feeling dumb having to decipher. So,
I think that's a fantastic, fantastic suggestion. Also, when teaching, that is my main takeaway with
students as well, is they want to shove everything that they can into a graph and say, I want one
graph to rule them all. And usually it's the opposite. Fantastic question, Noor, as always.
And Kylie, I saw that you had a question that had, I think, Laura piled on there as well and said
that she had a similar question. I'm going to highlight this in the chat, Kylie, not in the
chat, in the Slido so that everybody can see it. Would you be able to unmute and ask that one?
Yeah, sure. Hi, Keegan. Yeah, my question was really surrounding, I think it builds from your
DataVis answer, but like how, what are the challenges that you've faced when you're
communicating statistical results to non-statisticians, and how have you overcome
those? And maybe that's through DataVis or just using different words, things like that.
Yeah, another great question. There are a lot of challenges. I think in particular with
statistical results, people don't necessarily understand what something like significance means,
or if we're thinking about a statistical model, it's not just what any individual coefficient is
that matters. It's really, you know, the model as a whole. And that's something that's really,
really hard to communicate. So again, it'll be a little bit of a repeat, but one of the things I do
when we're trying to communicate like something from an actual model or a test or some sort of
finding is run it past people that aren't statisticians. They might still be researchers,
but that don't necessarily, you know, think in statistics language and see whether they
understand what we're trying to say. The other thing I've also tried to do is just not go
too overboard with communicating significance, right? So there's, I know there's like a million
different discussions that have been had in the past about practical versus statistical
significance. And specifically what I do, a lot of it is very public facing, like public policy type
research. And so for that, there is a difference between, you know, when we're showing
some sort of summaries of something we tested in a survey, you know, people's opinions about
something. Does it really matter if percentages are, if we've like really tested that they're
significantly different across groups, or do we just really want to show, you know,
what those percentages are and some uncertainty around those estimates, whether or not they might
be statistically significantly different. So I think it's kind of a two pronged, like thinking
about whether the actual stat pieces are really, really important to communicate to your audience.
And then if they are checking with people who like don't speak stat fluently and seeing how we
can maybe like update the language to make it a little bit more clear. But p-values, for example,
are notoriously very difficult to communicate to people. And I don't think we've really come up
with a great solution, but I think just trying to kind of wordsmith the language and even like
asking our communications people, like, can we iterate on what a better way to say this is,
that's still faithful to what it actually means statistically, but isn't, you know, our standard
boilerplate interpretation of a p-value. I think that's great. If there's any suggestions in the
chat, if you have successfully explained p-values to somebody, let us know in the chat how that went,
or if you're in favor of just throwing p-values out the window, because that has definitely been
a conversation lately as well. Laura Gass had added onto this question a little bit and said,
like, sort of related to this non-technical audience thing, how are you countering those,
or have you experienced it yet, where people are kind of undervaluing the math side of analytic
results, and just saying, like, we'll just ask AI. Have you had any experience with people
undervaluing the human aspect of a math person job yet? Oh yeah, this is a good question.
Laura, I hope I asked that faithfully. I might have mingled it a little bit.
Yeah, okay, she's giving me this. Just to add on just a little bit, I also find that people,
leadership asks for, give me a table of A versus B. They don't want a table of A versus B. They
want to answer a question, but they don't know, like, they have a business question. They don't
need the table. How, that bridge is the hardest one I've found to figure out how to get them to
ask me their business question, so I can use my math brain to help them solve the question,
rather than just put the data in a way for them that's maybe not the most useful,
or to build a model that's maybe not exactly correct for their question, so that's
kind of a little Christmas tree. Yeah, okay, this is a very amazing question, and I,
again, could probably talk about this forever, but this is one of the key parts of, like, my
day-to-day job, is figuring out how to force people to write down what their research and
business questions are, because people do sometimes think that they know what they want, like, when
we're building an application, sometimes a client will literally tell us, well, we want a table that
looks like this, this, and this, and then once we actually have a more in-depth conversation about
what the goals of the tool actually are and what their users might want to do, we really distill
it down to, like, what are the research questions, and I think, you know, parallel with what are your
business questions, right? What is the question you're trying to answer, and we just sort of
force people to document their research questions, and then from there, you can think about how do we
actually help people answer that question, and I guess we've had, like, some medium success, I would
say, in, you know, breaking people out of that, them telling us what they want to see, and instead
saying, no, but what is the actual research question? Like, if you had to interpret,
one of my colleagues has a really great way of breaking this down. She says,
you know, if you had to write out what this conclusion is in a sentence, like, can you write
it out for me, like, what you want to be able to say, and that kind of helps you back up to, okay, what
is the question that you're answering? So, like, in your case, you know, if they want to see a specific
table of A versus B, like, asking, okay, what is the conclusion you actually want to draw from seeing
that table, and then backing that up to what's the question you're asking of that table, and then is,
like, is the table really what you want to see, or do you actually want to see this other thing
that directly answers your question? So, that's kind of the, like, I don't know if that fully,
like, helped, but I think just forcing people to think through that sentence of, like, what is the,
what is this, like, the sentence you're actually going to say about the results that you're seeing
in this table, or chart, or whatever it is, that kind of helps. I like it. I think that that does a
great job. Thank you, Laura, for that fantastic question, for the add-on to yet another fantastic
question by Kylie, and I see another one in the chat, or not in the chat, in the Slido that I
really like as well. Megan, I thought you asked, I'm going to highlight that in Slido so that you
can see it and everybody can see it. Would you like to ask that live? Sure, I can. So, my question
was, you know, as having the title of a data scientist, do you experience any kind of, like,
cognitive dissonance or imposter syndrome because you're not really doing stats anymore? Because,
same, if so, because that's how I feel, right? Yes, great question, and yes, I totally experience
that all the time. It's really funny when I just, like, look at my title, sometimes I'm like,
it just doesn't seem right. I should just be, like, the pictures wizard, or whatever, you know, like,
it's just a different, and my skill set is different. I do think there's a really funny
example, actually, of a colleague of mine. This was a few months ago. We were in an initial call with
a colleague of ours about building a dashboard, and they needed someone to do some statistical
work on the front end, and they said, oh, well, Keegan's here. Maybe she could do that,
and my one of my colleagues who works with me on data visualization, just kind of off the top of
his head, was like, oh, if you need someone to do stats, like, we'll ask someone else. That's not
what Keegan asked, and he did not mean anything negative by it at all. He was correct in that,
like, if we needed someone to do that, we'd probably pull someone else in because most of the time
that's not what I'm focused on, and I prioritize, but of course, then I was like, well, I actually
do have a PhD in statistics, so, like, I could do it, but I'm not going to, and he, you know,
he profusely apologized, and again, he didn't do anything wrong in this situation, but it was kind
of funny. Like, you get into those weird, like, situations where people's assumptions of what you
can do and what you actually do maybe don't always align and differ across people, and also sometimes
I will literally just talk to my statistician colleagues and be like, I don't know what you're
talking about. Like, I've lost some of that knowledge, but also there's so many different
applications of data science and statistics that we always are not always going to know what our
colleagues are talking about, right, because everybody has different subsets, but it's easy
to think, I don't know what they're talking about, so I must have forgotten statistics,
when really it's probably I don't know what they're talking about because they have a very
specialized type of statistics they're doing that I never learned, especially all my survey
statistician colleagues because I've never been a survey statistician. Yeah, I find that a lot.
When everyone even talks about survival analysis, actually, I'm like, it's just never something I
studied or did, and I have absolutely no expertise in survival analysis,
but there's other pockets of stats that I do, especially applied stats. When you said,
when you explained that, I felt very triggered. I was like, oh my gosh, I would be upset if somebody
was like, oh, Keegan doesn't do stats. I'd be like, excuse me? I spent how many years in my PhD
working on this? Very interesting. You are much more diplomatic and calm than I might have been
in that situation. Well, speaking of something that you do have lots of expertise in and are
thinking about regularly, Patrick Long asked a question in Slido that I think would be great
to talk about, and we can all talk about this in the chat too. Patrick, are you available to ask
your question live? Maybe, we'll give a second and see if Patrick materializes. Maybe you start
by asking. Patrick says, no, sorry. No worries, Patrick. I'm going to ask for you. How do you see
data visualization evolving and any good book references recommended? I did see some book
references in the chat as well, like Tim Golden had recommended Nancy Duarte's book, which is
Resonate. Actually, she has many books, so it might not have been Resonate.
But Keegan, what do you think? How have you seen data viz evolving and any good books to recommend?
Yeah, this is a good question. So, I have seen it evolving in several ways. So,
I think I've seen one arm of data viz that gets into these really, really complex,
like very integrated and detailed visualizations that are just things we literally couldn't
visualize before, right? Because technology, visualization technology has gotten better,
and there are entire sections of conferences that explore fancy new visualization formats
that just weren't computationally possible before. And so, that's one area that I think is
really, really cool. I'm blanking on any examples at the moment, but just being able to visualize
more data and in different ways and get creative with how we actually visualize it.
And that's kind of one approach, but that, kind of like I mentioned before,
is really for the data people, right? Because like most, like the average person isn't going
to necessarily understand those more complex or detailed visualizations or new formats they've
never seen before. The other thing I would say is, like the other kind of angle is for more
simple visualizations, I've seen a bit of a change in how people present the data. So,
there's a really interesting movement towards changing how we think about labeling our data
visualizations and explaining them to people. And a couple of trends I really love are, you know,
thinking about how we define legends and titles in creative ways to kind of help the user understand
what they're seeing. Or even, we're seeing this more in like visual or in journalism,
like data journalism, is actually explaining, interpreting a given point or piece of a graph
for the user. So, like an annotation on the chart itself that explains to you what a specific data
point means. And that kind of helps center the user a little bit in, here's what this actually
means for this one point. Okay, now zoom out and look at all these other points in this chart,
like a great examples on a scatter plot. If you interpret what one dot on the scatter plot means,
that makes it easier for people to understand what all the other dots mean. So, I think those
are two very different kind of like tacks, but I think the increase in making charts more accessible
in a lot of ways, but in particular making the interpretation of them more accessible,
is a really cool trend I'm seeing more and more these days. In terms of book recommendations,
there are a ton. And one thing I'll say as a data researcher who like studies graphical perception
and understanding of charts, is that like almost every book has a ton of recommendations that are
different from other books. And almost all books that are out there are heavily based on practitioner
opinion. And I think part of being a data visualization person is that you have to kind of
form your own style and your own opinions a little bit. So, I wouldn't recommend any book over any
other book really. There's probably some I would say, maybe we've disproven some of the old,
kind of old guard recommendations for visualization. But for the most part, I really think,
I've seen a bunch in the chat already that they're all great recommendations.
But I wouldn't necessarily recommend one over another. I can't remember the name of it,
a really good one is Jonathan Schwabisch's book on, it's like visualizing, I can't remember what
it's called. That one's really good. I'm giving you a side quest, go find that book for Keegan
and put it in the link in the chat. The Policy Biz website probably has a link to it somewhere.
Zach just said, so what you're saying is all books are wrong, but some are useful.
Zach, hilarious. Yep, that's accurate. All right. Well, that was a fantastic question, Patrick.
Thanks for asking. I saw Stephanie asked a question and it kind of incorporates some other questions
that I saw in the Slido. So, Stephanie, you asked a question about having federal clients. Would you
be willing to ask that one live? I'm going to highlight it in Slido so it goes to the top.
Yeah. I'm Stephanie Zimmer, I'm at RTI. So, I also work with also federal clients. I'm not asking
anything too juicy because of the times. But how do you interact with your clients? A lot of them
are death by tables. And how do you sort of get them to modernize, to use visualization that is
not death by tables? Yeah, no death by tables. But also the add-on to this from another anonymous
question was sort of like any examples you could mention of things that are out there that are
public we could look at would be cool. Yeah. Yes. This is definitely a very common problem in this
space where we work with a lot of federal clients. And partially because federal agencies have a lot
of existing standards around how they report out data and things like that. I do think it's a
challenge. I don't know if there's like a perfect strategy that I've found by any means. But I think
one, this is going to sound silly, but showing them, visualizing it rather than just telling
them can sometimes be really effective. So, even just sometimes showing them an alternative,
even if they didn't necessarily ask for it, can help get them a little bit on board with,
oh, I really see the pattern now. And I also think there's been a bit of a shift
towards more like public facing visualizations in the last couple of years.
Because I think there's been some tools that have come out and data explorers that have come out
that have really shown people the benefits of visualizing the data. But I don't know. I mean,
this one is just, I think, tricky. And it depends on the agency, but also sometimes even just the
person who's overseeing the project, as I'm sure you understand. But I think it's just almost like
sometimes you have to show them the difference of like, here's what this looks like in a table.
Here's how powerful this pattern or this finding could come through
if you actually visualize it in this way and let people explore it that way.
All right. Awesome. I have another couple of questions to roll in. We have so many questions
on the Slido that I want to forge ahead. Thank you so much for that question, Stephanie.
And my next one is Edward Leland. You had a question. If you're able to ask that live,
I will tack on an anonymous question to the end of that one. We can combine them.
Yeah, sure. You want me to read the anonymous for you?
No, read your own. Read your own, and I'll tack it on at the end.
All right. I got you. My question is just, what's the biggest mistake that you've seen
in like a public data explorer design? And it takes some like really nice data,
but makes it like completely unusable or just unworkable in terms of visualization.
And how would you have fixed that if there's anything that just sticks in your head?
How would you have fixed that if there's anything that just sticks in your mouth?
Oh, wow.
This is a good one. And the anonymous question that sort of goes along with this is just,
how do you decide what aspects to drop when something is too busy?
This is a good question. I'm trying to think. Maybe I'll answer the second one first,
because I'm trying to think. I mean, I've seen my fair share of like questionable
public data explorers, but like nothing right now is totally coming to mind as like egregiously bad.
I think the main thing that I experience that frustrates me as a user in public facing data
explorers that's bad is lack of clear communication of what's going on. So it's sort of like,
there's a lot of like, there's a million drop downs, a million options you have to select in
order to pick your data. And it's not necessarily clear what you've actually selected. Maybe that's
filtering it. Maybe that's how you want to group it or aggregate the data or something like that.
And then you just get like a chart and the hover over it, like if it's interactive,
the hover overs or tool tips might not really explain what's actually happening in the chart.
The title might be very like dry for lack of a better word. It might just be kind of like,
here's what you queried. And the access labels might not be super strong. And so,
like, I think this is a very common problem in government data portals and data explorers is that
there's a lack of context and a lack of helping people actually understand what they're seeing.
It's just kind of like, okay, great. You queried the data. Here's a bar chart.
And it doesn't really help you actually understand the bar chart. And sometimes
it's not clear what the denominator is in the bar chart. If it's a percentage,
what the numerator actually is, it's just showing you some value.
And I think that's a big miss that I see a lot is lack of clear labeling. Like,
if I have to really think about like, how did this percentage get calculated? That's bad.
Because like, I think about data all day long. And we want to make sure that if people are
accessing federal data, they don't have to think about data all day long to understand what they're
seeing on a page. So, yeah, I don't have any, I'm not gonna like, give a specific example of
one I've seen that's bad. I'm sure there's a ton I could think of. But that, I think,
is one of the bigger problems that we see. And I'm sorry, what was the second part of the question?
I think that you covered it. It was like, how do you decide what to get rid of, what to drop?
So like, if you're visualizing something, and you kind of need multiple figures or dashboards to
explain complex trends, but the stakeholders insist on fewer figures, what aspects, you know,
would you get rid of? Or how do you decide? That's a big question, but I think you did cover a lot of it.
Yeah, and I would say, what we actually do is try to focus more on curating a specific view.
So actually, this goes back a little bit to Laura's question about like, you know, how do you get
the right insights, even if people aren't necessarily asking the question in the right way?
The approach that we try to take is focusing each view on a specific style of research question,
or a specific type of data, or a specific, like, you know, on this page, you can make a bunch of
different choices about what you want to see, but the data you're going to see are always going to
be in the same format, so that you understand exactly what you're seeing. And also, I talked
about this a little bit in my PositConf talk last year, but we also try to make these what we call
breadcrumb sentences. So the title on the page or on the chart actually interprets the chart for you
a little bit. So when you're plugging in, you know, an example on our live crime tracker site is,
if you want to look at crimes on a specific day,
and a specific crime type, you know, we're filling in that sentence at the top, you've filtered to,
I want to look at aggravated assaults on, you know, July 1st. The sentence at the top says
aggravated assaults on July 1st, and we've kind of highlighted the selections that you made within
that sentence, but it's very clear, like, what the context of the chart you're looking at
actually is based on what you've selected. And then also, you know, we try really hard to make
hover-overs and tooltips on all of our interactives that basically, like, interpret the
data for you, right? So if you hover over a specific bar in that chart, it'll say, you know,
there were 27 aggravated assaults in Chicago, Illinois on July 1st. This is a rate of however
many per 100,000 residents. So we, like, it's kind of, like, but instead of showing all the
data you could possibly see on that page, we're instead really focusing it on, like, you can
explore the data in a specific way, but we're making sure that you understand exactly what
you're seeing when you explore it in that specific way. And that, I think, actually ends up bringing
more value than just, like, throwing a bunch of data at people, because it's a really focused
exploration and answers a very specific question. I like that. Thank you. And thank you for the
fabulous questions, everybody, Edward, and then also our anonymous asker. Well, I saw that Abigail
had asked a question in Slido. There's an asterisk there, meaning she can't ask it live, so I'm going
to ask it for her. But this is a great question for the chat as well. So everybody, please feel
free to weigh in. She says, my current data viz decision tree is quarto for static things without
a super high degree of complexity necessary and then JavaScript otherwise. Is there a middle
ground for Shiny and what's the development situation like? Can I use sites with free tiers
like Netlify or Vercel with Shiny apps? And there was a reply that I will just read here from Nathan
in the chat that says Shinyapps.io and connect.posit.cloud have good free options. I totally
agree. Posit Connect Cloud has been amazing for deploying Shiny apps. Definitely go check that out.
But also sites like Netlify or GitHub Pages that only support static websites don't work for Shiny
because the server has to be listening to the user input. Any thoughts on this, Keegan?
From your point of view, I know that you work at an organization that's hosting things, maybe not as
an individual. Yeah, I think you actually mostly covered it. I would say like so all of our Shiny
apps that involve pretty complex interaction, we host on either a Posit Connect server or
on a Shiny server. And I am not aware, besides like Shiny Live, which I think is
another option that's come out to kind of develop Shiny applications in the browser. I know like
we've actually run into IT security issues with trying to use Shiny Live. So take that as you
will if you work in an organization that has careful IT policies. But that's another
option where you can actually like embed a Shiny app into a website. I don't, I'm
gonna probably say this wrong, but I think it essentially like installs all the dependencies
for the user in their own browser. So the first time they go to use it, it takes a while to load.
But then after that, it's basically like a Shiny app just running in the browser, which is actually
very, very cool. But that's another option if your Shiny app is like maybe a little bit
smaller. There are also some interactive libraries where you can make an interactive
widget that doesn't need to talk to a server. I would have to think about which ones
that can actually work with. But there's some light interactivity you can do without a server.
Yeah. Deepsha Mangani did a talk on Crosstalk in 2023, I think, in Chicago. That's a great
example of like something where you can have things talk to each other. And when you change
one thing, something else can change. But you don't necessarily need a Shiny server in the
background doing stuff. Yeah. Tim Golden says Crosstalk is awesome. I agree. Go play with
Crosstalk if you've never played with it. Maybe somebody will pop a link in the chat to Deepsha's
talk from 2023. I can't remember the title of it, but it was really great. Well, thank you,
Abigail, for that question. And if anybody has any extra tidbits on that sort of middle ground,
sweet spot for Shiny, please drop them in the chat. And I will say that, yes, Shiny Live is
one of those things where there's that caveat where nothing is secret, right? It's all out there.
If you have something that is going to be highly visible and is super public, I think that's a
really good option. And if not, be more careful. But there might be some gray area there with
intranets, right? With things that are like a net that's not exposed to the wider web.
I'm not an expert. That's a great question. All right. Let's take a look at our Slido here,
because we are 15 minutes to the end of the hour. I don't know how this hour goes by so quickly.
But I wanted to pop in our sort of softball question. Nathan was kind enough to ask it for us,
which is about the sci-fi and fantasy books. Nathan, I will read it for you.
Which sci-fi or fantasy book most influences the way you think about your work or data in general?
Maybe none, but you could tell us a little bit about a favorite fantasy or sci-fi book that
you've read lately. I'm trying to think if any really influenced my day-to-day work.
I can't say that any have either, but I can say that I have absolutely enjoyed some.
Yeah. So I'll say right now I just started reading the Expanse series, or the series that
the Expanse is based on. I'm almost done with the first book, so no spoilers in the chat, please.
And I'm really enjoying that. I also am a big fan of the Stormlight Archive series,
though I got kind of stuck, because if anyone knows that series, it's quite long and intense.
So I need to pick that one back up. I'm stuck on the fourth book. So I know the fifth one just
came out earlier this year or late last year. But there's no real reason I'm stuck. I just
kind of hit a cliff. And then one weird sleeper sci-fi book that people may or may not know about,
and it's just odd, so it's not going to be everybody's cup of tea,
is the Gideon the Ninth series by Tamsyn Muir. It's kind of dark and interesting. Yeah,
it's really funny. It's got a different style of writing than most other sci-fi and fantasy
I've read. So that one is definitely one. Awesome. Well, thank you for the question,
Nathan, because I was just kind of dying to ask Keegan this question myself. If you're stuck on
book four of Stormlight Archive, push through, because it's so good. It's so good. I am currently
stuck on book five, because I don't want to read it and have it be over. I also have never heard
of Gideon the Ninth, and I'm going to add that to my list. Everybody is saying that it is amazing
in the chat. And the ones that I just read, I read The Tainted Cup, which was really,
really good. And then the one after that, which I can't remember the name of.
But we will move on. Everybody put your fabulous book recommendations in the chat.
I had an anonymous question in Slido that I think was really great and approachable.
And it's, what advice do you have for someone who's just getting started with interactive data
viz? So, there are lots of options out there. Shiny, Tableau, Power BI, others?
Yeah. This is a good question in the sense of, I think there are a lot of different ways you
can approach it, and none of them are wrong, right? Data viz is a very multifaceted
process. So, that means there's a lot of different tools you can use, even within the R ecosystem.
I saw some different people popping packages in the chat earlier, like, you can use Plotly,
you can use Giraffe, you can use React Table, you can use GT. There's all sorts of different
choices you can even make, even once you're in a specific framework, like R, you can use
Plotly, you can use Giraffe, you can use React Table, you can use GT. There's all sorts of
things you can do in a specific framework, like R. Then, like you mentioned, Libby, there's also
Tableau and Power BI. There's also pure JavaScript, things like D3 and Observable.
And I think the real answer is, like, there's not really a wrong choice. We actually use a lot of
different approaches, really, depending on the project. And for us, because we're, like, very
client-focused, it depends a lot on our clients' needs. But I will say, like, me and the people
that I tend to work with have a very heavy, shiny bias, as you will not be supremised to learn,
because it's the framework we're most comfortable with, and we actually think it's really powerful
for a lot of reasons when we're working with data of various complexity. It's just often
a really strong approach to build something for a reasonable amount of money, and that's
really well-designed and works well. So, in terms of picking a stack,
there's not really a wrong choice. I think the biggest advice that I would give is just to start
playing around with stuff. If I were to go back and look at all of the charts that I made in
grad school, and even in my first couple of years at NORC, I'd be like, wow, I did not know what I
was doing, or like, wow, that's really ugly. But it's not. It's just that I was still developing
my own skills and my own style and my own understanding of visualization, and I think
it's easy to look at all these amazing visuals out there. I used to look at the TidyTuesday feed
on, like, Stats Twitter and be like, who are these people? Like, they're amazing. They're
coming up with these beautiful visualizations in, like, an hour, and I'm sure sometimes people took
more than an hour, but... They do. They do. They took many hours. I don't believe that. Yes,
but I just, I remember thinking, like, I will never be as good at that as these people, but
really it was just that I hadn't played around with it enough, you know, and now, oh, let's see,
12 years into working in R, people come to me all the time with ggplot questions, and I'm like,
they're like, you're faster than Googling it, and I'm like, okay, well, that's great. You could
have just Googled it, but like, you know, I'm happy to answer the question, but I never would
have, like, thought that that's where I would be when I started, so I think just give yourself
some grace to just start small and, like, learn whatever system you want to start with and just
play around with lots of different data. TidyTuesday is a great, great thing for that. It
just gives you lots of opportunities to try visualizing in different ways and getting
creative, even if it's just recreating what someone else made. Like, that's really good
practice, actually, is, like, can I exactly recreate what someone else already did, and it
takes some of the stress of having to make the decisions for yourself and helps you learn a
little bit more how to actually just do it, and then once you get more comfortable with, okay, I
know by heart how to make a stacked bar chart, how to make a bar chart, how to make a line chart, how
to make a parallel sets diagram, like, whatever you want to make, once you know those, then you
start getting more comfortable with when you see new data, which way should it be visualized and
sort of making that choice for yourself. I love that. I absolutely agree. TidyTuesday, if you
have not explored it, it's just a GitHub repo. It's very approachable. I know that there has
been a lot of, like, oh, it's just for art. It's not. They're just CSV files. You can read it in
anything that you use, and also all of the newer ones have Python code for pulling in as well as
now Julia code for pulling in, and I will let everybody know that Tableau does have a Tableau
public where you can go play with things publicly. You don't have to have a license. I know that can
be inaccessible, and my bit of advice here would be go develop in some of these things and ask
yourself what parts of the process you liked or didn't like. Like, I don't love developing data
in a point and click UI. It's not my favorite thing, so I steer away from Tableau and Power BI
for that reason. I really like the flexibility of Shiny, and then do you really want to get into the
nitty gritty? Do you really enjoy JavaScript? If you do, D3 might be a great option for you, right?
Ask yourself what parts of the process and the journey you enjoy because that definitely matters.
Well, I want to hop in here really quickly just to give a shout out to everybody who is attending
comp for the first time and maybe giving their first comp talk, and Keegan, I wanted to ask you
if you had any advice on attending comp for the first time or giving a talk for the first time.
Yeah, I'm not going to say don't be nervous because you'll probably be nervous no matter
what if you're giving a talk the first time. So, I gave a talk for the first time in 2022
with a colleague of mine. We gave a joint presentation, and I think we were both so
nervous. He told me afterwards, I think I just skipped part of what I was supposed to say.
I gave another one in 2024, and actually the room was a lot bigger, and there were a lot
more people there, and I felt less nervous. The first time might just be nerve-wracking, but I
would just say this, as evidenced by the chat, this community and the PositConf community is
one of the most supportive communities out there, and you're not out there presenting in front
of people who are going to be judging you. You're out there presenting in front of people who are
excited to hear what you have to say and really just want to get to know you and get to know the
cool thoughts that you're going to share, or the cool example, or the cool project, or whatever
you're sharing. It's a really cool opportunity to just show people a little bit of who you are
and what you're interested in and what gets you excited. I know it's cliche to say don't
be nervous, but it really is not like everyone's going to be staring at you and judging you. It's
like everyone's excited to learn something today. That was true. Yeah, it's true. So maybe it's not
don't be nervous, but trust the community. Yeah, it would be great. Yeah, I see Megan Harris nodding.
She says, yep, yep, yeah. I will agree. I had a lightning talk in 2023, and I felt like everything
went wrong. I started my lightning talk, and then all of a sudden, I realized that the slides on the
computer were advancing automatically, and I was like, what's going on? Everything went out the
window, and I was terrified. The moderator had to come help me, and then I had to start over,
and everybody was so nice to me about it. It was just a wonderful, positive experience that could
have been so scary if no one had said anything or cheered for me or laughed at all, right?
Really trust the community. Rachel says she doesn't remember that part. Well, I clearly do.
It left an impression on me. Well, we're about five minutes to the end, and I would love to fit in
one more question if we could from Slido. Everybody asks such fantastic questions on Slido,
so give me one second while I peruse here really quickly, because I think Tony had asked one that
I really liked. There it is. Tony, I'm going to highlight your question in Slido if you're still
here. Tony DePisa to ask that. That'd be great. Hello. Thanks very much. Still here. So,
especially with the current climate and distrust of data sources and fake data and all that,
how difficult is it and how important is it to describe or show the lineage of the data
so that people can trust your visualizations? Yeah, this is a phenomenal question, and I would
say it is both very important and very difficult, but it is totally worth it. So, this is something
we think about all the time is the transparency, and in my spare time when I'm not thinking about
visualizations, I'm a reproducibility person as well, and so I'm also very focused on that whole
traceability back to the original data source is of the utmost importance. I think it can be
really challenging because you don't want to inundate the user with too much information,
but one of the things we try to do is give people the option to explore the data source information.
There's two sites I'll mention. One is our live crime tracker, which I talked about a little bit,
and I talked about a lot in my PositCom talk last year. When someone's looking at a specific city or
a specific crime type, at the bottom of the site, we have all these details about that specific
city's data, or if it's a specific crime type, we print out what the actual definition of that crime
type is, but we also have a whole methodology page where people can go explore how we actually
grab the data and actually, for a specific city, pull up the link to their data portal that we're
using so they can go look for the data themselves, and that one's a little bit unique in that we're
pulling data from like 55 different sources. Then, for things like the Medicare current
beneficiary survey, so this is a project that NORC works on that's a survey of Medicare
beneficiaries. We built this chart book website that's an interactive data explorer for all of
the survey stats for that survey in a given year, and anytime someone is looking at a specific
variable, we literally print out the measure construction from the survey underneath,
and the definition of every single variable that's involved in the visualization on the page.
This goes back to Stephanie's question earlier about federal clients. They're very specific
about all of those details being present, and so that one can be maybe a little more overwhelming,
but you can toggle between like which details you want to see on that page as well, and so you
don't have to look at all of them all at once, but I would say it's extremely important to do it,
and it can be difficult to integrate it without overwhelming people, but it's still worth doing.
Absolutely. Thank you for that great question, Toni. It's a big one. I love it, and I'm glad I
found it in the Slido. I'm like scrolling, scrolling. I know he asked it somewhere.
Well, I wanted to do one final shout. We have like one minute left, and it's to the link to
Keegan's GitHub from her talk last year, actually, because Dave, thank you, Dave, had put in the chat
like, hey, I just cloned and ran Keegan's repo from her talk last year to see the outline, and it ran
immediately. She's not kidding about being into reproducible software, so he put
that in the chat. I am going to paste it again in the chat. It is her wait that's shiny repo.
Ah, yay, Rachel pasted it as well, so everybody can go check that out. It's extremely helpful
to look at the bones of that. Dave, thank you so much for finding it and sharing it with us.
All right, Keegan, thank you so much for joining us today. We have so many unanswered questions.
Thank you all for asking them. Any parting words, Keegan, or anywhere people can find you,
is LinkedIn the best place? Yeah, LinkedIn's pretty good. I'm also on GitHub, but I'm not
as active as I used to be, but I'm around there on my website, and LinkedIn is a good place to
find me. Wonderful. Well, thank you so much for being here, and everybody have a wonderful weekend,
and next week, Donnie Unardi is going to be with us, Principal Data Scientist at Genentech.
I hope that you will come join me and talk to him. I love Donnie. He's so much fun,
and it's going to be an amazing time, as always. If you found the chat super
helpful today, go and save it. Top right corner of the chat, three dots, that will let you
save the chat so you don't lose it. Don't lose all of those amazing URLs. I'm going to stick
around for just a second, so everybody has a chance to save it. And reminder, if you enjoyed
this and you would like to have friends come back with you, send us to them, pos.it slash dsh.
We would love to see them too, and we cannot wait to see you in the PositConf Discord server,
which is opening up soon. The best way to get on that is to go register for PositConf.
You don't have to register in person or virtual specifically to get on the Discord server,
either one. You're going to get an invite either way in your attendee portal. Thank
you so much for being here. We'll see you next week, everybody. Bye. Bye, everyone.